---
sidebar_position: 1
---

# 01 - Rust

We will use the [Rust](https://www.rust-lang.org/) programming language for the labs.

## Resources
1. The Rust Programming Language, Chapter 1, 2, 3 and 5 https://doc.rust-lang.org/book/#the-rustprogramming-language
2. Tour of Rust https://tourofrust.com/

## Basic programming language concepts for Rust

### Standard library

By default, Rust has a set of elements defined in the standard library that it introduces into each program's
application framework. This set is called the Prelude, and you can see everything in it in the standard
library [documentation](https://doc.rust-lang.org/std/prelude/index.html) .

If a type you want to use is not in the prelude, you must bring that type into scope explicitly with a use
statement. Using the std::io library gives you a number of useful features, including the ability to accept
user input.

``` 
use std::io; 
```

### The main function

The main function is the entry point of our program.

``` 
fn main() {
    println!("Hello, world!");
}
```

We use **println!()** to print messages on the screen.

To insert a placeholder in the println! method, use a **pair of braces {}** . We provide the variable name or
expression to **replace** the provided placeholder outside the string.

```
fn main() {

    let name = "Mary";
    let age = 26;

    println!("Hello, {}. You are {} years old", name, age);
}
```

### Variables and mutability

We use the let keyword to create a variable.

```
    let a = 5;
```

By default, in Rust, variables are **immutable** , meaning once a value is tied to a name, you cannot
change that value.

Example:

```
fn main() {
    let x = 5;
    println!("The value of x is: {x}");
    x = 6;
    println!("The value of x is: {x}");
}
```

In this case, we will get a compilation error because we are trying to modify the value of x from 5 to 6, but
x is immutable, so we cannot make this modification.

Although variables are immutable by default, you can make them **mutable** by adding mut in front of the
variable name. Adding mut also conveys intent to future readers of the code by indicating that other parts
of the code will modify the value of this variable.

```
fn main() {
    let mut x = 5;
    println!("The value of x is: {x}");
    x = 6;
    println!("The value of x is: {x}");
}
```

Now the value of x can become 6.

### Constants

Like immutable variables, constants are values that are tied to a name and **are not allowed to change**,
but there are some differences between constants and variables.

First of all, you are not allowed to use *mut* with constants. Constants are not only immutable by default,
they are always immutable. You declare constants using the *const* keyword instead of the let keyword .

```
const THREE_HOURS_IN_SECONDS: u32 = 60 * 60 * 3;
```

> To understand better, read **chapter 3** which is in the [documentation](https://doc.rust-lang.org/book/#the-rustprogramming-language) at the beginning of the lab!

### Data Types

- ### Scalar types

A scalar type represents a single value. Rust has four main scalar types: integers, floating point numbers,
booleans, and characters.

**Integer** → Each variant can be signed or unsigned and has an explicit size.
```
let x: i8 = -2;
let y: u16 = 25;
```

| Length              | Signed | Unsigned |
| :----------------: | :------: | :----: |
| 8-bit |   i8   | u8 |
| 16-bit |   i16   | u16 |
| 32-bit |   i32   | u32 |
| 64-bit |   i64   | u64 |
| 128-bit |   i128   | u128 |
| arch |   isize   | usize |

**Floating Point** → Rust's floating point types are f32 and f64, which are 32-bit and 64-bit in size, respectively. The default type is **f64** because on modern CPUs it is about the same speed as f32 but is capable of more precision. All floating point types are **signed**.

```
fn main() {
    let x = 2.0; // f64
    let y: f32 = 3.0; // f32
}
```

**Boolean** → Booleans are one byte in size. Boolean type in Rust is specified using bool.

```
let t = true;
let f: bool = false; // with explicit type annotation
```

**Character** → The Rust char type is the most primitive alphabetic type in the language.

```
let c = 'z';
let z: char = 'ℤ'; // with explicit type annotation
let heart_eyed_cat = '😻';
```

- ### Compound types

**Tuple** → A tuple is a general way of grouping a number of values ​​with a variety of types into a single compound type. Tuples have a **fixed** length  : once declared, their size cannot increase or decrease.

```
let tup: (i32, f64, u8) = (500, 6.4, 1);
```

**Array** → Unlike a tuple, each element in an array must have the **same type**. Unlike arrays in some other languages, Rust arrays have a **fixed** length.

```
let a = [1, 2, 3, 4, 5];
```
> To understand better, read **chapter 3** which is in the [documentation](https://doc.rust-lang.org/book/#the-rustprogramming-language) at the beginning of the lab!

### Functions

We define a function in Rust by entering fn followed by a function name and a set of parentheses. Curly braces tell the compiler where the function body begins and ends.

```
fn main() {
    println!("Hello, world!");
 
    another_function();
}
 
fn another_function() {
    println!("Another function.");
}
```
- ### Settings

We can define functions with parameters, which are special variables that are part of a function's signature. When a function has parameters, you can provide it with **concrete values** ​​for those parameters.

```
fn main() {
    another_function(5);
}
 
fn another_function(x: i32) {
    println!("The value of x is: {x}");
}
```

> In function signatures you must declare the type of each parameter!

- ### Declarations vs. expressions

Function bodies consist of a series of instructions optionally ending with an expression.

Declarations are **statements** that perform an action and do not return a value.

Expressions evaluate to a resulting value .

> To understand better, read **chapter 3** which is in the [documentation](https://doc.rust-lang.org/book/#the-rustprogramming-language) at the beginning of the lab!

- ### Functions with return values

Functions can return values ​​to the code that calls them. We don't name the return values, but we must declare their type after **an arrow (→)**. In Rust, the function's return value is synonymous with the value of **the final expression** in a function's body block. You can return earlier from a function by using the return keyword and specifying a value, but most functions implicitly return the last expression.

```
fn five() -> i32 {
    5
}
 
fn main() {
    let x = five();
    println!("The value of x is: {x}");// "The value of x is: 5"
}
```

> To understand better, read **chapter 3** which is in the [documentation](https://doc.rust-lang.org/book/#the-rustprogramming-language) at the beginning of the lab!

### Control flow

- ### If
All if expressions start with the if keyword , followed by a condition. Optionally, we can also include an else expression.

```
fn main() {
    let number = 3;
 
    if number < 5 {
        println!("condition was true");
    } else {
        println!("condition was false");
    }
}
```

You can use multiple conditions by combining if and else in an else if expression:

```
fn main() {
    let number = 6;
 
    if number % 4 == 0 {
        println!("number is divisible by 4");
    } else if number % 3 == 0 {
        println!("number is divisible by 3");
    } else if number % 2 == 0 {
        println!("number is divisible by 2");
    } else {
        println!("number is not divisible by 4, 3, or 2");
    }
}
```

Because if is an expression, we can use it on **the right side** of a let statement to assign the result to a variable.

```
fn main() {
    let condition = true;
    let number = if condition { 5 } else { 6 };
 
    println!("The value of number is: {number}");//"The value of the number is 5"
}
```
- ### Loop

The *loop* keyword tells Rust to run a block of code over and over forever or until you **explicitly** tell it to stop.

```
fn main() {
    loop {
        println!("again!");
    }
}
```
One use of a loop is to retry an operation that you know might fail, such as checking if a thread has finished its work. You may also need to pass the result of this operation out of the loop to the rest of your code. To do this, you can add the value you want to return after the break expression you use to stop the loop; this value will be returned out of the loop so you can use it:

```
fn main() {
    let mut counter = 0;
 
    let result = loop {
        counter += 1;
 
        if counter == 10 {
            break counter * 2;
        }
    };
 
    println!("The result is {result}");
}
```

- ### While
```
fn main() {
    let mut number = 3;
 
    while number != 0 {
        println!("{number}!");
 
        number -= 1;
    }
 
    println!("LIFTOFF!!!");
}
```

- ### For
```
fn main() {
    let a = [10, 20, 30, 40, 50];
 
    for element in a {
        println!("the value is: {element}");
    }
}
```

> To understand better, read **chapter 3** which is in the [documentation](https://doc.rust-lang.org/book/#the-rustprogramming-language) at the beginning of the lab!

### Structures

Structs are similar to tuples, in that they both contain multiple related values . Like tuples, pieces of a structure can be of different types. Unlike tuples, in a structure you **will name** each piece of data so that the meaning of the values ​​is clear.

To **define a structure, we enter the** *struct* keyword and name the entire structure. The name of a structure should describe the meaning of the data elements grouped together. Then, within curly brackets, we define the names and types of the data, which we call **fields**.

```
struct User {
    active: bool,
    username: String,
    email: String,
    sign_in_count: u64,
}
```

To use a structure after having defined it, we create an **instance** of this structure by specifying concrete values ​​for each of the fields. We create an instance by specifying the structure **name , then add curly braces containing key:value pairs** , where the keys are the field names and the values ​​are the data we want to store in those fields.

```
fn main() {
    let user1 = User {
        active: true,
        username: String::from("someusername123"),
        email: String::from("someone@example.com"),
        sign_in_count: 1,
    };
}
```

To access a certain member of the struct we use this syntax:

```
fn main() {
    let mut user1 = User {
        active: true,
        username: String::from("someusername123"),
        email: String::from("someone@example.com"),
        sign_in_count: 1,
    };
 
    user1.email = String::from("anotheremail@example.com")
}
```

> Note that the entire instance must be **editable**  ; Rust **doesn't allow us** to mark only certain fields as mutable!

As with any expression, we can construct a new instance of the structure as the last expression in the function body to implicitly return this new instance.

```
fn build_user(email: String, username: String) -> User {
    User {
        active: true,
        username: username,
        email: email,
        sign_in_count: 1,
    }
}
```
- ### Tuple structs

Rust also supports structures that resemble tuples, called **tuple structs** . Tuple structures have the additional meaning provided by the structure name but do not have names associated with their fields; instead, they just have the field types. Tuple structures are useful when you want to name the entire tuple and make it a different type from other tuples, and when naming each field as in a regular structure would be wordy or redundant.

```
struct Color(i32, i32, i32);
struct Point(i32, i32, i32);
 
fn main() {
    let black = Color(0, 0, 0);
    let origin = Point(0, 0, 0);
}
```


> To understand better, read **chapter 5** which is in the [documentation](https://doc.rust-lang.org/book/#the-rustprogramming-language) at the beginning of the lab!

### String
Rust has only one type of string in the base language, which is the string slice str which is usually seen in its borrowed form **&str** .

The **String** type , which is provided by the Rust standard library rather than encoded in the main language, is a scalable, mutable, and owned UTF-8 encoded string type .

- ### Creating a new String
```
    let mut s = String::new();
```
This line creates a new empty string called s, which we can then load data into.

**We can use the String::from** function or the **to_string()** function to create a string from a string literal:
```
    let s = String::from("initial contents");
```
```
let data = "initial contents";
 
    let s = data.to_string();
 
    // the method also works on a literal directly:
    let s = "initial contents".to_string();
```

- ### Adding to a stream

We can expand a string using the **push_str** method to add a string slice.
```
let mut s = String::from("foo");
s.push_str("bar");
```
**The push** method takes **a single character** as a parameter and adds it to the string.

```
    let mut s = String::from("lo");
    s.push('l');
```
- ### Iteration Methods on Strings

The best way to operate on pieces of strings is to be explicit about whether you want characters or bytes. For individual Unicode scalar values, use the **chars** method .
```
for c in "Зд".chars() {
    println!("{c}");
}
```
### Run the program
We must access the director where the main.rs file is located and execute the command:

```
cargo run
```

## Exercises

> If you don't have Rust installed, you can use Rust Playground [https://play.rust-lang.org/?version=stable&mode=debug&edition=2021] to solve the topics.

1. Write a program that prints your name.
2. Define two variables and assign them a numerical value. Shows the maximum value between the two without using a temporary variable.
3. Write a function that checks if a number is divisible by n.
4. Define an array of numbers and write code to display the maximum value.
5. Define a structure called Computer that defines the brand, processor name, and memory size of a computer.  
a. Write an associated (static) function called new that creates an instance of the structure.   
b. Write a method called display that prints all the information.
6. Define an array with elements of type Computer. Write a program that displays a menu with the following options:  
a. print all computers  
 b. print the computer with the largest amount of memory  
Read the keyboard keys and perform the selected option until you read something different from a and b.